economic policy at least in the fp leve was to a large extent made by bearocrats in various US depts and agencies that are somehow connected to econ fp, but prez dont usually show int in economics, content to allow econ fp to be made in low levels of beau, it was relatively consistent and functioned on the basis of beau momentum than anything else.

there were few interventions in the fp in regard of econ from pres with a few exceptions like Nixon in 1970s going off the gold std.

what clinton wanted to do w/ECouncil was to create in fp realm an institution like in the NSC in sec policy.

Meant to coordinate econ p process and keeping an eye to the extent of which domestic econ polic y was roughly in line with foreign econ policy.

was to coordinate the con policy advice going to pres, to make sure he got good advice and various points of view, to insure that the policy decisions made by pres or his appointees is consistent with the pres' goals and lastly to monitor impl of those policies.

It is a beau like most others, altho smaller than NSC and was run by a principled committee at the top of the org and various other interagency committees in lower level, working groups, deputees committees for specific tasks.

the natinl econ council played a big role in f econ policy, esp. w/ jp econ meltdown, passage of nafta negotiated by bush sr admin and although clinton during his election critic the effort and had to respond to a 3rd party candidate ross perot (strongest critic of nafta, famously declared that the free trade pact would result in a great sucking sound as companies flee to mx. ca was seen less problamatic due to cdn std of living are roughly equiv to those in the US)
  given perot, he had to take a middle row, in order to prevent this great sucking sound, the us would have to pass side legislation to make sure working cond were established in mexico and that env stds had to be more strictly enforced in mexico. not much happened post election, he signed on to the treaty. great sucking sound never really happened as increasingly corp found more attractive locations in other parts of the world, esp w/ anyother NEC project the neg of most fav nation status to China.
  once china had better access to the US market, it became more interesting than in Mexico and consequently most production shifted to that market.

  CLinton first appoint robert rubin as his natiol econ avisor and who designed the council and subsequently moved to treasury.

  bush jr in 2001 was less interested in econ matters and less well informed but nonetheless continued to rely considerably on the NEC and its advisors and made a couple of important changes to the NEC.
    1. sought to integrate sec poli with econ pol
      to make this easier he forced the NSecAdvisor and NEconAdvisor to share the same fp desk, meaning that in the apparatus they were to coordinate their activies and offices combined in same location.
    2. increased staff of NEC
      but had considerable problems filling main positiions part. NEcon Advisor with folks reliable to him.
      bush admin to a large extent sat on its hands despite consdierable storm clouds on the horizon, incl. real estate bubble in 2005-2006, tho does not deserve blame for that as Greenspan was technically in charge of that
    
Elections
  elections and fp
  how obama's fp is gonna differ

  Elections are Irrelevant to fp
    Mr. Obama's fp will be virtually indistinguishable from Bush.
    Conventiona elec wisdom & politics in general, politics stops at water's edge, fp is generally bipartisan.
    Worth pointing that altho obama got elected on basis of his fp critiques of bush admin more than anything else and his suggestion that he would bring change to us fp, it is probably the change he is going to bring will be more in style than in substance and far less than what his supporters expected.
    Perhaps irrelevant is overstating it. Style does make a diff in fp, and in that regard generally the Rep party over last decades has tendend to a greater degree of unilateralism and isolationism whereas Dems have since new deal have been more assoc w/liberalism int'lism and a greater emph on diplomacy as opposed to mil action in achieving the us fp goals.

    Reasons why generally the perception is that elecs dont matter in fp
      - most imp. Elections on very few exceptions are won on basis of fp. If so, bush sr would've been a shoe-in for reelection, perceived as extremely exp in fp, he went down for domestic issues, which are far more important than fp.
	The past elec may be somewhat of a notable exception to that.
	  Not that it wasn't important, economy been a big issue and signs of trouble were starting back in last Nov and FI meltdown certainly took some of the wind out of the sail, but ultimate his critiques of the fp
      
      - most pres candidates have little or no exp in fp and very little interest in fp. 
	gwbush fits desc, came to power with very little int in faffairs
	Profile of presidents in postwar period and before that, is that fp exp is exception rather than rule. Maj of presidents come from congress like LBJ and Kennedy and Nixon or as governors of various states like Reagan, Carter and Clinton. 
	  In both cases with the exception of senators, they have very little exp in fp. The fp positions in Congress aren't very desired and in the Senate they are desireable only as stepping stones to pres election chances. 
	  Much nicer to sit somewhere else as it brings no influence back to their ridings.
	FP tends to be left to the momentum of the admin beaus that take care of them. In the absence of a strong effort from presidents, they generally just let the beaus take them forward.
	  Big problem Obama is gonna face as he will have to contradict many beaurocrats.
      
  Fp Has been shifted by election env, but rather a shift than a gradual transformation
    What is often called an electoral realignement that have had substantal fp impacts. In terms of elreal, a good point is the dominance of the Rep party in the post civil war area, party of unity, big business and controlled a majority of houses of congress and the presidency. That era of Rep dominance came to an end in 1929 under Hoover. 
      Could've been diff, as had a Dem been in office in 1929 the Dems might've been blamed, but as it turned out a Rep was hit and as he favoured laissez faire capitalism but which for the most held the same consensus as most other officials.
      Hoover's response to the stock crash painted the Rep party as ineffective in realm of economics and provided Roosevelt with the opportunity to reshape the economy substantially through the New Deal.
	Success of the new deal, which was fairly spotty till '42 or so, tho it relieved major pressures in US economy, what really got US econ out of depression was the new demand for US products postwar.

      On economic policy prior to stock market crash they didnt have much diff econ policy, tho Dems had a more liberal institutionalist approach. FDR embrced that foreign policy and his election in 1932 marked a shift away from unilaterilism and isolationism from the 1920s and toward an engagement with the international community.
      This policy ultimately became the new consensus in many ways, tho it is important to point that FDR died in office and was replaced his VP Truman who was not particularly close having been chosen as a candidate to balance the ticket.
      Truman was originally not very big lib internationalism and while truman certainly backed away from cooperation from the USSR, his fp nonetheless retained other features. Most convenient way of attacking Roosevelt legacy and Truman was to suggest that they were either communist inspired, fellow travelers or weak on communists and probably forced Truman's hand in his policies towards the ussr, resulting in the cold war and eventually of the policy of containment and deterrence. C&D were again compromises that were relatvely conservative and advocated by realists that suggested that a more aggresive stance would be met with a more aggressive response, arguing that it would prolly not be expansionist post ww2, and that it should just contain the ussrs influence and the spread of its ideology. 
	Not to rollback commies, but to accept its existence.

    New deal elec realigned created a new consensus postww2, the anti communist consensus, and while ppl on the right wing of rep party who rejected that consensus and ppl on the extreme left of Dems, presidents regardless of which party tended to stick to that consensus.
    Election of Eisenhower with his vp richard nixon, nixon being the quintessential anti communist, however he did not have a great deal of influence. Dwight being a centrist, he mostly continued previous, and in fp virtually no change.
    Some changes re: latin american occurred during eiseinhower as it backed away from backing military strongmen as a way to mantain stability and thwart USSR influence and encouraging reformist regimes, but that was a fairly minor change that came midway thru.

    Best i.e of bipartisan consenus was the election of nixon vs kennedy
      Nixon bitter anti commie, right wing rep, where jfk was a liberal northeastern son of a millionaire, long involved in politics, but a northeast liberal tried to win an election on the issue of the missile gap, trying to be more of a hawk than the ultra hawk, to be more anti commie and militarist, despite the fact that he must've known that there wasn't a missile gap.

      Maintained basic commitment towards containment, deterrence, created breton woods and maintained UN for regulating conflict within the int'l community.
      cos jfk's lib neast perception, he picked LBJ who was from Texas, with whom he had substantial policy differences. Quite clealry chosen cos he wasn't close to Kennedy to balance the ticket and bring southern conservative democrats. 
      Johnson of course did not make major policy turnarounds, bending over backwards to finish off jfk's term with most of the advisors in place and only changed them after his own election. LBJ once pres provided to be quite more liberal in domestic politics than most expected, expanding welfare.

      Nixon elected not on basis of changing fp drastically, but on his claim that he could admin it more affectively, claiming ability of ending vietnam, but coulndt stomach finishing it in unfavourable terms to US.
      Ultimately a continuity of fp, he brought about a new electoral alignment in part to the discredit that he brought to his office.
      Ironically, the alignment undermined dominance of Dem dominance of white house and senate and more contestable elctions in which the Reps became more dominant.

      Carter came on in part reaction to Nixon, but was replaced by Reagan, who had control of both houses of congress and the election of bush sr. Clinton interrupted role of reps briefly in 1992 but gave rise to the rep revolution in 1994 in which reps gained control of both houses of congress which ahd the effect making clinton a lame duck pres after two years. Rep revol in Congress creates a period of extreme partisan politics leading up to 2000 elections.

    2000 election ruffled lots of feathers, occurred during a point w/o fp consensus. In the elections Gore clearly won popular vote, but lost in the electoral college only cos he lost state of florida altho results in there were questioned.

@feb5

decision making theory
  many diff ideal types of dec making proc and only one of them fits neatly into the assumptions that are usually made in the realm of intl rel particular the realist school of analyzing intl pol, and that is rational actor model.
  assmed the well est states act ration to promote their sec (well est cos there is consd debate about 'rogue' states that may not act as rati as others and chief example is dprk and iran, in particular w/iran, the sanity of leader of n korea is doubted, cos of its drive to obtain nucl weapons many argue this is a fundamental threat to intl stability in particular cos iran is not judged to be a rational char like most other countries and thus india which obtained nules in 70s and paki in 1990s both seen with some worry but eventually accepted by the intl comm cos they are 'rational actors', not so with iran cos it is run by a bunch of religious fanatics who are convinced tha t they are fighting a holy war or something against the west world and their recompenses that may well be suicidal as a state actor, and altho they might never think of using wmd, in the case of iran we can't count on that cos they are all fanatics.
  whether they are not not going to be argued but the critics of that kind of view note that iran is a relatively stable country with a constitution and a set of dem inst like elections and fixed terms an in the last two elections with katama and ahmidinajad the ones that one where not the ones with the theocracy which suggests it is a fairly rational state we do not need to fear.
  a bit beyond the scope our topic but keep in mind that not all states are deemd but most are assumed to be rational and assumed to follow rational actor model meaning that in an open matter they receive info on a problem they want to address, determine their options in an open minded way and try to get best policy to pursue.
  kennedy during cuban war crisis is said to be the kind of guy who followed this model; he got everyone and discusses every option and finally decided on a solution that resolved the problme. carter semed as following a similar pattern and clinton w/yugos but perhaps not no other aspects.
  there are strong signs that obama is inclined towards a similar kind of decision making insofar as he has so far brought into his cabinet and group of advisors ppls with v diff perspectives and that he is not closed minded in terms of what he will pursue for his fp goals.
  to what extent he is capable of working with his cabinet is an open question. 

  bush followed v diff model in regard to fp and his core fp in re: war on terror, model called groupthink model, coming out of research bi irving janice, who noted that groups are not always rational, humans maybe but collectively group dynamics tend to conformity. conformity to a strong leader with strong opinions mean people are reluctant to criticise or offer alternative perspectives, as this questioning may look disloyal and then be overlooked for promotion. tendency for strong personalities to surround themselves with yes men.
  bush white house not the only one; lbj is cited as being very typical of this approach, that once he made up his mind to pursue a mil option in vietnam he was reluctant to ever back away. v. strong chance of failing, far reduced chance of obtaining obj of policymaker.
  reagan another example of following a fp that fits very closely in gthink in particular w/iran and nicaragua, and bush sr in regard to his policy toward kuwait. 

  a third dec making process is what is termed the gov proccess model. this model differs from both of the others insofar as the RActor mod is centralized around the pres, and rational, the gthink model is centralized around the pres but irrational, the gov process model is perhaps neither, neither part. rational or centralized.
  what is meant by this model is that its more likely to occur, andh apens in all presidencies are in situations where a pres isn't particularly involved in a decision, a lot happens under terms of beuarocratic tribal warfare. 
  any policy that comes forward affects diff beauros differently, where diff depts get involved with more funding and more prominent, and beros tend to protect their turf
  when a pres isnt particu interested a strong tend to follow the gprocess model which is essentially based on compromise b/w various beaurocratic interests and ultimately a kind of watered down policy which may not be as disatreous as gthink it is not v. effective at achieved policy goal.

  tends not to be as optimal, it is dec and kind of irrational in coming up with effective policy. 

  a last model, and that has some overlap but a lil harder to distinguish, there is the org process model. seen as identical or v similar.
  all orgs have certain ruotines and that there is a v strong tendency for these routines to oppose themselves in formulating specific policies. an argument could be made 


  these are 'ideal types' that to a greater or lesser extent accurately describe actual processes that go on in govt. so for example in kuwait it could be groupthink certainly in terms how the cabinet worked but it also has aspects of org process model, so groupthink is limited to where the pres has very strong opions about a certain object matter. bush jr has very big attn in nat sec issues had very big groupthink model


  tendency to overestimate dispositi
