@jan 7 2008

Blackboard:
  check announcements.
  course documents

Writing:
  12pt double space
  light hearted responses
  
Contact:
  office, email unlikely ("do I really need to send this email?"), no assignments over email. 


Science Fiction
  1. Hard sf
    Associated with Wells, Asimov, Clark (classics). 

    a. From Wells onwards tied closely to science in subject mtter and in narrative in the way its told. the writing itself seems to be founded on methodology method and logic of scientific experiment, important to wells thematically, plot. In their writing hard sf writers tend to be quite faithful to the laws of universe as known at the time (obv. subject to changes over time, i..e Wells vs Asimov). Tend to have a rigorous alliegence to sci accuracy, wanted scientifically plausible which must come from logical consequences, no flights of fancy, or it has to *feel* that way, in the way its written, logical outcomes from physical constants in the world. Big sf fans love finding the places where the writer had slipped and some inconsistency.
    
    b. Hard sf tends to value versimilitude (feeling real). Narrative voice (implied), or an actual character tends to be very practical and pragmatic. It's matter-of-fact about the science, a lot of concrete description; Wells does this to almost an extreme extent in the time machine as he explains exactly how it could happen. Very meticulous, partly how the reality effect is created. The plot tends to be science-drive, wonders of science and science itself is a character moving the plot forward. More interested in the physical than the social or psychological world, outward directed. Higher focus on sciences that operate on physical world.
    
    c. Grows out of an enlightment (18th century where religion gets replaced w/science as the basis through which people interact in the world. In mid ages i.e. the world around us not as important as the world to come, seen even in architecture, medieval cities being very slapdash because this world was not that important, afterlife better. Around 18th century this starts to shift, so suddenly ppl are paying attn to outer world, like with da vinci who is concerned with flying and how the body functions, *stuff*, our world). Hard sf tends to view the lws of the universe as constant, and those are its origins, and the idea that the world can be described accurate and events predicted scientifically. Even when we get into quantum world in 20th centurythere is still a great allegience that you could describe this and figure it out - nothing that is mystical. 
      
      The greatest wonder is to be discovered pondering the physical nature of the universe. This in itself is wondrous enough, no need for complex characters; it is enough to ponder this world that surrounds us. 
    
    Wells is the father of this type, you could go back to frankenstein but it is in many ways a romance novel despite the monster, Wells is seen as the beginning tho the term doesnt develop till the '20s.

  2. Speculative fiction / Fantasy

    Marge Percy woman on edge of time; Octavia Butlers, Kindred (afro american pulled into past to rescue white slave owning ancestor so she could be born). Less concerned with HOW but with WHAT happens and her predicament and what she does then.

    a. Extrapolates from existing conditions, takes a set of circumstances and imagines into the future or another place or into the past or different conditions in our own world. Uses std plot devices like time travel or alien worlds or unfamiliar worlds, there are scientists all over the place, we can have spaceships, gadgetry and problems are usually still worked out in some logical fashion but there is less concern about the plausibility of the events re: the physical world. Not going to explain how somthing always happens, etc. 

    b. Still have that lang of science, science type people like anthropologists or doctors. Still an attempt to make the world plausible; we're not being mystical. One diff is that it tends to be very much character driven. In Kindred, it is very much about the protagonist's internal struggle, and her struggle with her ancestor, who is not a nice guy but she needs to keep saving over and over again. Her struggle with other slaves, etc, the things Octavia Butler tends to be interested in. Tends to be more concerned with plot, more literary, style, char development. Whereas hard sf tends to have stock characeters ("the medical man, the physicist").

    c. More interested in psychology, social experiments than in fidelity to science (no longer the most important thing). Primary focus on social extrapolation, what if these relations b/w people, utter complete gender equality, what if women/men dying off (fave of 1970s fem utopias). Internal driven, people are feeling/thinking as opposed to external driven where are you going who are you fighting. She thinks that hard sf is didactic - let me teach you about science, but speculative didactive diff lets teach you a moral lesson, about behaviour (i.e. humans meet aliens, how ppl react, etc). Often talks about a world that can or should change socially, how the economy is going, class relations, this is all brought up to the forefront.


  Post-modern sci fi
    William Gibson, Neuromancer (fabulous)
    Gibson on one end and Butler on the other end re: world view
    
    a. Gibson tends to use sciency language but not that concerned with accuracy, lots of jargon that sounds very intimidating but may really not mean much at all. Pomo tends to be very tecnhophilic, loves gadgets, loves machine human interface - cyberpunk (which basically gibson invented) falls under this rubric and it loves its toys.

    b. Concerned more with a surface, techno style. Very gritty, a lot of overwhelming details but the diff is someone like Gibson or Sterling is not going to spell it out for you like Wells (who wants to walk you through how it makes sense) where a lot of cyperunk/pomo you ar e just dropped into this world where nothing is explained and you gotta figure it out, a club you're in or out. Some focus on characters but again they tend to be very stock, i.e. the alienated young man and recently the alienated young woman. Often set in the near future. Wells who carries us to apocalyptic end of the universe or the time of dinosaurs; tends to be just a lil bit in the future i.e. blade runner, things have changed just enough for some cognitive dissonance. 

    c. Tends to express this alienation from existing conditions, pessimist about future/human nature. Basically the world is a hostile place and the plot is often the main character's attempts to navigate through this place - not necessary in a reputable or morally admirable way.

  a - Relation to science
  b - Aesthetics (nature of narrative, characterization, etc)
  c - Ideology behind it
      Pomo tends to be about alienation, etc.
  
  Two main approaches: the narrative itself, the plot, the characters; the other is looking at the work within its historical context and understanding it within that context. Really focusing on how these works are products of hopes and anxieties of the time in which they are written. We can't pull them completely out and talk about Gibson or Wells as if they werent a product of their moment in time. Some of the big questions are 'what makes us human' and in many cases where do we define our humanity?, from the actual limits of the human say in Ghost in The Shell. Talk about class and power relations, in Wells consideration of class, in Kindred power relations in context of race and obviously humans and technology.
  You go from Wells who has a handy machine, but it's a tool. In cyberpunk the machine is part of the human, no clear line b/w the two, and this can cause a lot of anxiety. Some gender politics as well.

  So, 'The Time Machine' extrapolates from the class conditions of Wells' time. At the time he writes this (which he later recants, being very ideologically wishy washy), he's a v. committed socialist and what he's seeing is a widening class division and the condition of the minors are very drastic and so he takes this with his two races - the underground dwellers and the above ground ones.
  'The day the earth stood still', apart from being too awesome, it really is a product of its historical moment in this case the cold war. The whole thing is a cipher for antagonism bw US and USSR which is just starting to consolidate itself. It uses a ind of allegory to talk about the tensions b/w these two ideologies and world views.
  'Fahrenheit 451' written in fifties but takes up a diff anxiety, about a visual media replacing books, a disspearance of literature and reading.

  What Gibson talks, what happens when identity gets partially spearated from the body, interacting in cyberspace, how important is our body to our identity? There's a character whose mind is preserved in a metal box, and he's not thriving; immortal but not thriving. 

  Also do 'Ghost in The Shell', which is v. important for genre of anime, and so clearly treats the limits of humans and the machine.

  Terms: 
    1. Extrapolation
      From existing social, political, economic conditions imagining a progression to what they might be - into another time, another world, a difference set of circumstances, it can have to do w/physics or psychology. A pretty broad set of possibilities.
      In a sense all works of fiction do this, but sci fi does this in the most radical way. Examples:
	Class relations
	Gender relations
	Economic developments
	Technological developments

	What creates these anxieties?
	  Anxiety about increasing div b/w rich and poor
	  Ideal of gender equality
	  Climate will get increasingly unstable
	  Fait in/fear of medical advances

	Fictional projection based on these hopes and anxieties.
	  Class war
	  Males all die off
	  Canada becomes only source of water
	  Medical advances conquer disease

      Outcome
	(basically the narrative)
	  Two classes become two species
	  All female utopia is achieved
	  Canada invaded by US
	  Immortality is achieved

    2. Defamilairization
      to create distance; all lit does this, as its made up, but sci fi depends very much, this is its strength, it creates this distance which allows us to get a bit of removal from the everyday
	New, unfamiliar species
	Time warps - future or past
	Unfamiliar terrain

	Cognitive Dissonance
	  challenges our assumptions

    3. Thought Experiments
      What if?
	Travel to the future
	Create a basically human AI
	Apocalypse
	Encountered aliens

	Meet yourself in the future
	AI's take over the future
	Humans reduced to primitve conditions
	Exploration spaceship makes contact with aliens

      Fictional Experiment
	Attempts to avoid future self
	Human being become underclass
	Rebuilding society
	war w/aliens

      Conclusions
	not necessarily, okay! here's the moral of the story, but its often implicit
	  time travel is a bad idea
	  it's dangerous to create AI's
	  Humankind is resilient
	  Humans can't deal with "otherness"

Next time: HGWells Time Machine upto chapt 2

@jan 13

Sophocles
  Oedipus Rex goes to Thebes but can't get in cos theres this massive Sphinx guarding it, unless he answers a particular riddle. If you don't answer correctly he gets eaten. 

  What would be evident to Wells' readers is how this riddle is used by Thomas Carlyse in 'Past and Present'. 
  carlyse introduces another sphinx but for himt he riddle is what to do with the working class. It's appropriate in a way that Wells would use this symbol. Carlyse has a slightly diff take on it; both talk about how put down the working class is, Carlyse talks about the responsiblity of the captains of industry to take care of the working class. 

  Other context for decadence is decadent art that emphasizes self indulgence, aesthetics, content, effort.

  Establishes narrative logic with other assumptions and interpretations, and everytime he gives us an interpretation he says but how wrong I was! dun dun dun duuuun. 

  He meets the Eloi; they are unconcerned, flower children. 

  Hypothesis by the Time Traveler
    1. A kind of Eden; he's sitting at the top of a hill looking out at this kind of vista, "it was as sweet and fair view as I have ever seen".
      A kind of statis-complacency, how they've lost necessity. 
      
    2. Two species theory. He realises after seeing the Morlocks and understands them that he has not this eden with a race of Eloi achieving some kind of stasis but rather two species where the morlocks constitute the underclass who have literally been driven underground.
      The Eloi are dominant.

    3. Morlock's ascendent. 
      Oops, I think I know what the Morlocks are eating. The Eloi are the ones who have become the victims and is split between disgust and a recognition that the Eloi kind of got what they deserved.

@jan 28

klaatu is a sympathetic figure, and the viewer is encouraged to identify with him instead of the media misrepresenting him and the army chasing him.

We in the audience know that he's a regular guy and there's this ironic dist that makes us suspicious of the media. In case thats not enough he's also represented as a kind of christ figure. Her question to us now is, in what respect what did we notice about his story that makes him into a christ like figure.

in day earth stood still,

klaatu - justice, US
earth - USSR/all rogue nations
Fed of Planets - UN/NATO
gort - atomic bomb

Different text.
Written at almost the same time, 1953, it has a v. different preoccupation. It picks up some of the themes of both the time machine and the day the earth stood still. Fahrenheit 451.

Similar themes w/time machine
- consumed by entertainment/leisure
  loss of knowledge, dumbing down, in particular of history
power relations
  class
  gov't/fire fighters
    People are being actively controlled and oppressed.
post-literate societies
  - in TM books literally crumbled to dust over 800k years
  - in F451 books are being burned, actively destroyed
language makes us human

whole story is about montag learning about literature.
In f451 the govt wants to keep people in the eternal present and hamstring any kind of social transformation. If you can't imagine anything other than what exists right now, there is no understanding on how to make things different and bradbury makes his claim that one way of understanding this is thru literature.


FF - active coercion
FF - active witness, part of society

TM - outsider, evolution/devolution
In f451 it's all about the protagonist and his journey from an enforcer to a kind of rebel.

What about the nature of the devolution?

psychologically vs physically devolved. In case of TM, traditionaly hard sci fi long periods of time, where as in f451 time frame much more compressed. Don't look any different physically.
active resistence vs passive acceptance.


both books have this female character who introduces the conflict and guide the plot.

@feb 2

mildred represents this deep disatisfaction that underlies people n this society. you dont attempt suicide unless you're at the point of despair, tho she doesn't remember clearly at some unconscious level that she's desperate.

something is very very wrong, something we don't see in the time machine. because theres this deep disatisfaction it suggest possibility for change. ofc we also see montg dev this sense first with his encounter with clarice,

she introduces this very inconvenient question, are you happy?
by pg 12 he felt his smile slide away, melt, fold over down on itself like a tallow skin, like the stuff of a fantastic candle blown out, darkness. he was not happy. 

beaty clearly has a couple of functions, clearly acts as his super ego, keeping him in line, but he also acts as a kind of explicator, to explain how tihs society came about, with these extended monologues with beaty. Another diff from the tm where we have a char who undergoes all these hypothesis trying to get it right, here we have someone who delivers the history to montag.

going back to the start, we have this symbol of the hearth and the salamander. 

Hearth
  Home (Hearth & home)
    the place around which everyone gathers.
    images of fire, but fire as warmth, comfort, this idea of everyone gathering togehter as one, a company, a collective, the idea of fire as warmth. 
Fire  
   how is this kind of ironic, in our context with the book?
     fire as destruction, we know right from the very beginning that we're not talking abot a warming fire.
   a kind of negative cleansing

How about the salamander?
  live in/through fire
  a reptilian association - the hose described as a great python, spitting fire, the device the techs use to pump millie's stomach is a black cobra.

  Then we have the electric hound
    dogs
      loyalty, they'll go so far to save you, protect you
      man's best friend
      hunting
      territorial
    electric hound
      search and destroy
      weapon/gort
      superego, guard
      territorial
      technological
	bradley critizing our dependence on technology
      it sleeps but does not sleep! not quite the dogs we know


Sieve and sand
  we witness the continuing transformation of montag's consciousness and we see it coming to a crisis, readying to boil over.
  futile effort, living in the eternal present, no attention span, montag's frustration at his inability to grasp what is true in the world and his situation.

  he's going to be told that lit is essential for functioning for society and told by beaty that its what destroyed society

  millie and her friends
    montag asks her several times, it's about those people, what kind of people who are they? they're those people. Well whats the story about? well he's mad at her, and they're mad, but it's okay in the end. Why are they mad? What's the point? what's the narrative? and this is precisely what millie can't tell him

    there's this scene with a huge emanation of sounds and music from the televisor, yeah it almost feels like something happened? but everything is completely superficial overloading of the senses, standing in the place of genuine narrative.

    they have no clue, don't even care

  what does faber represent?
    conscience - in montage's ear, displacement
    he know he's a coward
    an alternate POV, the traditional values bradbury cleary prefers
    serving as a mentor/catalyst for montage to become enlightened?
      what is that alternate perspective?
	pg 83 do you know why books like this are important? because it has quality, it has texture, features, etc, etc, the good writers touch life writer, the mediocre ones run a quick hand over it, do you now see why books are hated and feared? it shows the pores of life
	books show us not only ourselves, but what life is about, this is essential to our humanity. Beaty would agree, but it's the last thing that we need.

    Beatty
      present
      strong, maybe not intented to identify with him, but he's a strong figure, a tragic figure in the end.
      status quo

@feb4

faber - perspective that values knowledge, history, he's educated, a former professor so he MUST be smart. talks v specifically what it is about literature that allows us to understand life, the world around us, quality txture and pores that literature really gets at. the problem right now, flowers growing on a rock, with no deep roots, implication that media tech are those kind of pretty flowers, where lit has these deep roots. 
He tells montag that there are a numer of things that are required of lit that make it effective, unlike say the fireman rule book, some kind of quality.

We have this scenario of the dueling quotes.

What traitors books can be!

1) Minorities -> empty out content
  it promotes anger, destroys authority 
  beatty becomes a burner of literature cos it betrayed him, a promise of literature. 


Who is to blame?
- in TM we have a very clear group identified, the leisure class
- in Day the Earth Stood still also a very clearly culpable group of people, the people of earth in their agressive nature
- in F451 it's a little more complex. 

1) people - instant gratification
	  - reading is "too hard"
	  - minorities
	  
2) media tech/tv 
  does all of this dumb us down?
    slight contradiction, "it's not books you need its the things that used to be in books, it could be in the parlor families, could be projected thru radios and televisors but they are not"

3) gov't
  in an opportunistic way moves in and takes adv. of people's indifference


pg 115, beatty
what is there about fire that is so lovely, what drwas us to it? it's perpetual motion the thing man wanted to invent but never did, it's a mystery, its real beauty is that it destroys responsibilites and consequences

pg 116

pg 145, 146

the phoenix bit were its reborn

---
destroys responsibility, consequences
  montag, you're a burden!
relieving a burden -> erase -> change
  get rid of the old
turn away from destructive fire
campfire-hearth
phoenix, how we're diff from the phoenix is that we know whats happened in the past, used in a kind of negative way


-- 
Water

Montag is running away, a river is involved, very obv. imagery about rebirth, baptism in the water, and meets away this idealized hobo society.

War

deus ex machina

role of media

he sees himself reflected in all of these televisions, it becomes completely unreal, they kill a fake montag.

At the very end, we have ppl becoming books. Kind of marks the extent of their oppresion, it's so dangerous to own a book that they have to make themselves into books.

it also makes literal of bringing literature to life, of embodying the literature. 


@feb 11

slave narrative

big issue before it got abolished.
in SC almost 50% of pop were slaves. 

Even with the founding fathers there was some discomfort arond founding a nation that was so economically dependent on slavery.

feeling that american values of justice and humanity is inconsistent with slavery. A concern about "what does it say about us? what is it doing to us? what are our children learning? what kind of a country we are creating?"

theres this dissenting voice that even comes up in the courts, but it just has too much popular support at the time, even to get it inthe constitution.

the civil war occurs and then there's reconstruction. 1865-67, the defeated south & confederacy legally protecting the civil rights of freed men and at the same time you have white democrats slowly coming to power in Southern states, sometimes in paramilitary group led elections that attacked blacks.

One of the odd striking things are the white Dems that first enact the Jim Crow laws to disenfranchise blacks, like creating a min literacy or income level in order to vote, instituting a poll tax.

In Kindred,

Dana is trying to escape to the north.

It becomes an issue with the return of folks from ww2, as institutionalised segregation did not exist in the european theatres. They're kind of shocked to return to these kinds of conditions and demand the right to be treated as full citizens.

Butler - "I dont think Dana could've come back whole from the experience", set in Maryland cos it was plausible.

Narratives - usually written by fugitive then post slaves, enormous influence on african american lit in general. Until the Depression these actual testimony narratives were more common than novels in aa lit. (Look up 'beloved').

Bildungsroman - education, self actualisation

Slave narrative is testimonial. its rhetorical function is much more than just storytelling or entertainment. more to do with remembering or memory oten emphasigin accuracy, legitimacy, authenticity, first hand authentication of these stories was very important. I need this on the record, both for my self and my people, we need to remember and tell what happened.

Past/resent


@feb 25

social sci fi, not much intetest in the how

Role of prologie
- interest us, raise more questions than it answers
Legacy of Slavery
Time travel device
  They don't know if they can actually change history
  
  Sets up a contrast between modern world + slavery
    shown again and again in the novel, which maintains the contrast throughout the book, we're not given the opportunity to be absordbed in the world of slavery
  
  Disorientation/shock
    how is our reading of Dana is different from a protagonist in the 19th century
  
  We can relate to Dana / identify with her, empathise with her
  
  Sets a comparison up between 2 eras
    "we've come a long way, uff", we can still see some lingering similarities between the two cultures, lasting effects of racism in Dana's world, where this gets increasingly uncomfortable. 
  
  Differential time 
    She can't get used to the routines and rules, to adapt, acclimatize, no space for forgiving, forgetting and moving on
      this is important cos, Dana is so nervours when she realises the extent to which people can get used to exploitation, these enslaved people have become to used to it which she does not experience.
    For her, the trauma is kept very much alive
    More of a wedge is driven between Dana and kevin as a result 

Links between chars
Education

@mar 2

pomo sci fi

uses style and lang of hard science bt not as concerned w/accuracy
technophile-relation to science is more thru gadgedts
esp. interested in creating a particular feel in terms of the env (often dark)
given to using particular self-referential jargon that can be exclusionary (in the sense that it is helpful for the reader if they have read other books that have contributed to developing the genre)
often set in near-future on earth
the world is a hostile place!

Stock chars, lack of femininity.

@mar 4

Politics:
  80s punk & counter-culture
  cultish/exclusionary
  Built on a contemporary sense (beg. 80s) that the nexus/web of politics/economics/social org is so *vast* and *complex* that it is impossible to identify the origins of power
  Rebellion

Characters
  associated with rebellion
    trying to break out of this system
    manifests itself in crime and illegal things
  very male (male 'anti-hero')
  young alienated disoriented
    young = hip, alienated - post modern concern with fragmentation, the individual, chars need to be alienated and disconnected, you are a small cog in a much much larger machine
  morally numb, paranoid, into drugs
    most of the chars have some sort of dependency
    creates a natural sort of paranoid, besides coming out of this system of power - your choices are beyond you, there is a larger shadowy thing controlling your fate, forces them into a sort of moral numbness, you have to make these choices in order to survive and get on.


Setting
  Near Future
    when it first came out, much harder to envision, tho today much closer to reality
  Street level
  Filled with cast offs
  underground market
    outlaw zones, places where exchange of tech & data can go on freely and that these places are ihghly illegal
  internal world of virtual reality and cyberspace
    a lot of early sci fi is concerned with outerspace, where the cyberpunk is more concerned with the internal, whats inside our heads

Style/Aesthetic
  hard boiled detective novel
  western pulps (esp. anti hero or loner)
  horror genre
  urban, hip, gritty
    lots and lots of jargon
  narrative is non linear, disorienting, fragmented
    cyrber punk as a whole, is almost a necessity to play with the psychology of the mind, we never work linearly, we're a constantly looping construct
  high tech

The million dollar question:
  Are personality and identity constructed? how does each relate to agency/free will
  
# liberal arts seems full of people who take themselves too seriously, which for a techie, it's hard to not be taken back by their approach because *I* deal with the objective everyday, and I'm rewarded directly with being RIGHT or WRONG all the time and I can tell you a thing or two about that. 

Donna Haraway - potential resource

"Post-human"
  Gibson says that we ARE technology.
    we rely on this technology almost implicitly.
  Is neuromancer a moral novel?

Humans and Technology
  The eyes were vatgrown sea green nikon trnsplants
Simstim, 'a meat toy'

meat a derogatory term, met by limitations

Case is only really free in cyberspace. Why?
  Only place where he can exceed his limitations.


What to do about the question of wintermute
  completely controls armitage like a puppet

Most corporations in the text don't trade in goods and services but rather in information and data. How does this focus on abstracted (non-object) commodities change the power dynamics in the society of Neuromancer?

Who holds power in this novel? How?
  The gatekeepers of information


People/Environment as Data
  Linda Lee: her features reduced to a code
  environment as data possible to see Ninsei as a field of data, the way the matrix had once reminded him of proteins
  Dixie Flatline whose body has died but whose self lives on as a construct, a recorded memory in a computer that is capable of action, intention, real time memory
  McLuhan notion of global village almost literally realized.

  What kind of parallels does this have in contemporary society? What does this do to identity in the novel?

Women and femininity
  Molly has been called the 'embodiment of cyberpunk consciousness'

  What role does she play?
    She's the guide for Case and the reader. A narrative device that allows Gibson to explain a lot of the mechanics of the world. You can have Molly explain it to case.
    She's also a 'street samurai'

  Is this a traditional female role?
    Obv. not. Subverting a lot of traditional expectations of female chars, strong, intelligent, use her sexuality for her own benefit. Molly is literally a cyborg with all sorts of weird implants. She holds a position of power within a very male dominated society, she is the person that 'kills things'.

  How are procreation and technology related in the work?
    They clone them.
    cuts out the maternal, the ability to care for humans.


The Importance of Space
  Space an the navigation of space is v important in Neuromancer. This navigation takes place both on a virtual and on a real level. Cyberspace would seem to be the most important space - in conceptual terms and in terms of where the really important action takes place, but there are otehr very important spaces

  55, 59, 61, 64, 81, 82, 105, 116-121 - descriptions of cyberspace

@mar9

transcending the body

what is the relationship between the body, identity and agency (esp free will and the extent to which we have it, and what conditions need to be met for us to have free will)?

agency is limited, cogs in a huge machine

donna haraway -
  the cyborg is resolutely committed to partiality, irony, intimacy and pervesity. It is oppositional, utopia and completely without innocence... Nature and culture are reworkedl the one can no longer be the resource for appropriation or incorporation by the other."

  How does Haraway's cyborg differ from other representations of robots (mech beings) in the course (i.e. Gort)

Transcending the Body - Towards the Cyborg
  time and bodily constraints
  tech fusion
  body vs cyberspace
    what happens to the body in cyberspace
    what parts of case are in cyberspace
      purely consciousness, abstract, disembodied

  All point towards a blurring of bodily reality and virtual tech

Case
  What is his relationship to his body? Does he enjoy being "meat"? Does this change in cyberspace?

  Simstim: not transcending but a transfer. How does Case react? (pg 56)

  What is the narrative purpose of simstim?
    what is gained as a reader?
      1. We get to experience the technologt
	Case is relatively human, but Molly definitely is extended, post-human

Peter Riviera
  How is Riviera's subliminals similar to simstim?
    first job is breaking into the bank and stealing
    Riviera second job, described as complete psycopath
      His special implant/power, "subliminals", able to project images and feelings onto other people.
    In terms of transcending the body, blurring virtual and reality

The moderns
  trolls, doing it for the lulz

Dixie Flatline
  Most obvious example of humans escaping the body comes thru Dixie who got recorded
  Limitations: pg 81
  Questions body and identity

Human - Tech Relationships
  Military/Political
    Corto, corporate
  Biological/Tech
    Humans as data, ultimately computer and human code are fused
  Religious
    the supernatural or miraculous
    Dixie as Lazarus
  Where/what is our identity?

@mar 11

There are no entities within the text that exist in no physical forms

what who are these entitites?

what is the purpose of having these in the text?

ICE - metaphoric things
  What does ICE represent metaphorically within the story? What sorts of themes are attached to it?
  represents a sort of authority, the only thing that really imposes rules
  it's an insulator against a vast complex network all the characters are fighting against.

Cyberspace
  gibson describes the world as a post-geographical world
  "consensual hallucination" - consensus reality
  "it's possible to see Ninsei as a field of data the way the matrix once reminded him of proteins linking to distinguish cell specialities"

  blurring lines between virtual and reality

Simulacrum
  "likeness or similarity" used to describe something bearing

  how is cyberspace diff/similar to the physical cityspaces the chars inhabit?

  what does cyberspace do to the structuring and acquisition of knowledge
    knowledge becomes less about knowing facts or data but the ability to retrieve facts

AI & Simulacrum
  Like cyberspace the AIs are represented only metaphorically, the are only narrated indirectly
    thru the bodies, stories of others

  AI as the ultimate other extreme simulacrum

  Does Gibson succeed in representing AI as the ultimate other?
    what is meant by ultimate other?
      
Wintermute
  What exactly does Wintermute lack that we have?
    A personality, a form
      i.e. his need to use other memories
    Intent - ability to act with complete agency
      isn't quite there. 
      

  What does Wintermute have that we have?, or have that we lack?

Intentionality and Agency
  In communicating and manipulating Wintermute says its forced to deal with _givens_, takes adv of what already exists. Wintermute manipulates characters thru some formative emotional exp that they've had or some significant relationship (especially considering how he not only gets them to work for him but managed to move them around)

At the hear of the book...
  to what extent are we in control of our actions and to what extent are our actions determined by forces outside of our control?


Structures of "obsession"

Case (118, 152)
  Cyberspace, Linda
    Linda reborn into cyberspace, her death reawakens emotions

Riviera (perversity and childhood)
  drug addiction
  there's this scene where it defines a lot of his idea of perversity, to not gain anything
    he's from this war torn country where he is forced to eat this dead soldier
    formative emotional experience, the driving level of his personality

Molly (141-2, 148-9)
  Obsessively nomadic relationship
  Worked more of a puppet than a prostitute
    brothel where people turned on/off, she wakes up where some guy is killing some other person
  Her motive, "i'm wired this way, i'm an assassin by nature", her obsession is part professionalism, living what she considers her sort of destiny

Armitage(190)
Zionists
  one of their prophets said that wintermute is a sign of the apocalypse, a sign of fate and that by not participating in this they are actually fighting destiny
  this prophecy of apocalypse

"A young man's book"
  (18:20 of dvd)

  Gibson describes Neuromancer as a book about creating a family
  Why does he say this?

What is "human"
  So far is there any indication that there exists something that is uniquely human (that can't be technologized)?
    the emotional experiences
    there is nothing that isn't technologized

The Human
  Emotion (144, 152, 205)
  Personality(208, "templates?")
  Flesh(179)

Tessier-Ashpool
  Family History
  Corporation/Clan
  Perfect corporate entity
  Family/space/intelligence as nest (centralizing image: 126, 171)

  Case undergoes a dream, living with Marlene this woman in this apartment and they're both high and he goes on and kill off all the wasps, and sets fire on it (126) he saw the inside the of nest, the birthing chamber. 

@mar 16

necromacer - form of divination where the practitioner seeks to summon some form of spirits for protection or wisdom, coming from the greek for 'dead' and 'divination'
  hence "neuromancer"
    a channeler of these disembodied personalities in the AI

Story vs Plot
  what is the difference between story and plot?
    story is a retelling of events where plot is a chain of events
  whose story is this?
  who is driving the plot?
    wintermute is literally transporting us from space to space to space

Intention
  Tessier-Ashpool goal is conflicted b/w corporation and clan (biz vs family)
  Marie-Frances' goal?
    wanted to create a hybrid entity to look after the best interests of the corporation/family, this thing that ould make its own decisions with the fam's goals in mind
  Wintermute's goal? (pg 269)
    to merge with its brother entity. Is it free to make this decision? Part of its programming?
  What are the goals of the other family members?
    preserve the clan, keep the business going
  Neuromancer's goal?
    wants to preserve the status quo, it doesn't need to merge with wintermute.	
    only neuromancer has any sense of self preservation

Agency
  what is agency in this book?
    how do people make choices? what are they guided by?
    Case - wants to preserve his connection to the net, coerced into making choices
    wintermute manipulates 'givens', rituals of personality, this idea of structures of obsession: (driving bit of their personalities, motivation to go thuru the plot)

  how do characters assert free will in this novel?
    they don't really assert it. few chars are making their own choices

Identity
  "unlike my brother, i create my own personality. personality is my medium"
  pg 259

  what is neuromancer?
    pg 251, 243-4
    sameway a necromancer deals with spirits, neuromancer deals with personality
    a giant construct for recording personalities, and spitting them back out

  what are neuromancer's limits?
    it doesnt appear to have ambition, seems satisfied with itself
  does it have more of an identity than wintermute?
    it might think it does, but perhaps not. 

Move from the body to the Avatar
Unknowability of the flesh
  pg 239

  "he looked at the back of his hands, was the faint neon molecules crawling beneath the skin, ordered by the unknowable code" pg 241
  
  collapse of biology, technology and the divine
  is the body still relevant at the end of the book

Where we end

  One critic observed that the relevant conversation is taking elsewhere; the autonomous AI's significance is radically other to human - unknowable

  Is neuromancer a moral novel?

  Does gibson answers the questions he raises about identity and technology?

@mar18

themes of gits

body and tech

identity what are the ghosts

ai and agency limits of tech

@mar22

final essay
  pick two quotes, id and relate to the themes of the work
  small essay
  larger essay

ghost in the shell
  very similar to neuromancer
  maybe a little not subtle

Manga
  man can mean, in spite of one self, involuntary
  ga pictures

  word created in 1814 to describe a stationary singular work

Aesthetics
  Cinematic techniques - movie storyboard
  black and white
  great detail
  large eyes
  extreme expression and emotions

Narrative form
  depth of plot
  little sense of closure
  wide variety of topics and styles

Themes
  Spirituality and spiritual optimism
  gloom, melancholy
  fascination with extraordinary weaponry, combat robots, and other military prostheses that amplify the powers of diminuative and often feminine or feminized characters

Icon:
  any image used to represent a person place or idea

Semiosis
  sign = signifier + signified
  signified - the concept the sign represents
  signifier - the form the sign takes

  sign as icon
  (Ferdinand de Saussure, Jacques Lacan)

The Results
  Reading comics or watching anime is a completely different experience

Thematic Importance

How does this notion of an icon fit in with neuromancer or gits?

@mar25

review terms
  micropolitics - foucault
  cyberpunk
  posthuman
  post-geographical
  simulacrum
  consensus reality
  avatar
  icon
  sign = signifier + signified

Donna Harway - cyborg
  a cyborg is a cybernetic org a hybrid of machine and organism, a creature of social reality as well as a creature of fiction
  
kusanagi self identifies as a cyborg. how do the cyborgs in GITS compare with those in neuromancer

major kusanagi & female identity
  cyperbunk is a very traditionally male genre. Does gits with major as a female lead char, subvert or up hold this?
    maybe not

  how is the body treated in gits? thinking of the previous quote is the body relevant in this work?
    treated as tool or vehicle, readily exchangeable

Maternity & Motherhood
  bladerunner's opening scene contains a "skin job" being interrogated. when the interrogator asks the skin job about his mother he goes razy.

  similarly in gits one of the first question asked of a captured culprit can you remember your mum

  why are mothers such an issue/fear in tech'ed societies?

Memory in ghosti n the shell
  scene from dvd
    thats all it is: info. even a simulated exp or a dream; simultaneous reality and fantasy any way you look at it, all the info that a person accumulates in a lifetime is just a drop in a bucket


    what is the role of memory and detail in gits?
      the memory isn't really whats important but the emotions attached to that memory, a realness to it.
      memory is as much a construction as anything, we always build upon on them
      details get reconstructed, characters are given these broad plots but which they can't build upon.

    loss of memory as trauma

  Identity
    there are countless igredients that make up the human body and mind, like all the components that make up me as an individual with my own personality. Sure I have a face and voice to distinguish myself from others, but my thoughts and memories are unique only to me, and i carry a sense of my own destiny. each of those things are just a small part of it. i collect information to use in my own way. all of that blends to create a mixture tht forms me and gives rise to my conscience.
      -kusanagi

    Humanity
      What does Motko find so alluring about deep sea diving? to what other kind of diving is it implicitly compared? How are the two similar? how are they different?
	maybe a take back to when her body was created in the initial body construction scene

	ghost diving
	  there is hacking, and diving. a distinction
	
	what is she afraid of?
	  losing her identity, what if her life was a simulated experience
	  only thing that makes her feel human is how people treat her
    
    Ghosts
      what is a ghost in the film?
	it's what makes you human, the soul

      how are ghosts tied into identity? is having a ghost enough to form a unique identity?
      it's independent of the body

      not alive, disembodied, other worldly

      why are the members of section 6 and section 9 so surprised when the puppet master claims asylum as a new life form?
	agency, free will

    The Puppet Master
      What is the Puppet Master? How was it created and for what purpose? how did it survive?
        created for hacking for public terrorism to control public opinion
	it survives by its own self awareness.

      how would you describe the puppet master?
	rebellious, intelligent, aggressive, persuasive

      how does the puppet master compare to neuromancer or wintermute?
      
    Humanity & identity
      at the end of the film, Motoko's and the puppet master have a conversation about diversity, reproduction and death as the fundamentals of humanity. What make these "human" qualities.

      death being a form of decay, change, disintegration

    Technologized body as divine
      is the post human a divine figure?

      "for now we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face; now i know in part, but then i will know fully just a i also have been fully known" (on boat in Kusanagi's voice), I Corinthians xiii. 12

@mar30

darwin, concept of evolution

tree of life in gits
post human and cyborg
  man as the divine
  is the cyborg a constructed

Evolution and the post-human
  what are the descendants of the post-human or the cyborg? where can we trace its genealogy back to?

  it the post-human or the cyborg a separate species from man?

Does the movie argue that the post human/cyborg is a divine creature?
  divine
    of or pertaining to God o a god
    Godlike heavenly celestial
    in a weaker sense: more than human, excellent in a superhman degree, of persons: of more than human or ordinary excellence, pre eminently gifted, in the highest degree excellent
    as a verb, to have supernatural or magical insight into [things to come], to have presentiment of

corinthians
  idea that you learn yourself
  in terms of syntax, contrast between present and future, now -> then

@apr1

review
  cognitive dissonnce
    an uncomfortable feeling caused by holding two contradictory ideas simultaneously

  where a character is de-familiarized from their own experiences - what was famliar becomes unfamiliar

  where have we seen cog diss in texts in thecourse?

Freud - The Uncanny
  Definition: an instance of simultaneity where a person/obj is both familiar and foreign at the same time, creating a feeling of strangeness, results in feelings of attraction and revulsion

The Uncanny Valley
  Theory put forth by famous robotist Masahiro Mori: he said that when there are robots cyborgs and other creatures that look and act like humans it causes us to echoing freud respond with revulsion.

  the less a robot looks like a human the more empathy we have for it; at a certain point it becomes too human and famliar and that creates the feeling of revulsion

Biological versus the Mech body
  "hand over your flesh. we demand it"

  What are some of the differences b/w bio and mech bodies in the shorts?
    slowly fuse together, symbiosis
  what imagery is used to fuse the two together?
    literal fusing, cables running thru things

Symbols
  the apple
    forbidden fruit - repetition of biblical stories
    a colonizing, as it becomes a mechanical apple at the end
    complete reversal in positions, man becomes submissive to machines, defined by their function
  the brain
    seat of reasoning
    info storage
    what makes us us
      towards the end it becomes an object you can control and create, a machine you can switch on and off and manipulate and move towards a function, a job
  the sky
    a break in continuity
    hope


The Archive
  Jacques Derrida - Archive Fever
    The archive is both historical and natural, ordered and controlled by commencement of events. the archive is both obv tied closely to memory and nomology (philosophy concerned with the laws or principles governing the operation of the mind). Derrida also argues that archives are the place where knowledge and memory pass from the private (the dwelling, the mind) to the public. The arch must then be conservative by its nature.

History as...

  how is the story framed?
    the narrator is steeped in biblical language and presentation of the story, archive news sources and in there we get reactionary language

  what kind of language and phrasing is used to describe and further the story?
  why use this language set? what implications are then made of man? of the machines?
    it's a origin story for them.

The 2nd renaissance as archive
  is this a traditional archve? why or why not
    idea that it is biased

  how does the use of a variety of footage change the message/meaning?
    gives it authority
    becomes an eye witness account
  what is the role of the narrator in the shortS?
    bless all creatures w/intellect
    history becomes more important than guilt, giving voice to those affected by the genocide/disenfranchised

@apr6

learning about machine sex
  fragmented narrative
    to keep interest in the story
    meant to be disoriented
    thematically it reflects the main char's view of society, people, love

  how does the book fit within the cyberpunk genre
    reader is dropped into the world
    thematically?
      mixture between machine, humans

  ethics?
    typically outlaws, amoral
    character whose survival depends on being able to do unethical things

  rooted in the underculture, the underground

  how does angel compare to kusanagi?
  
how is sex treated? how is sexuality treated?
  commoditized
  an object, bought, sold
  angel is able to use it as a weapon, get what she needs

  what's the significance of the scne with the "cowboy"? (note the play here, we have a real cowboy and not a cyber-cowboy). What does it mean that he is gay?

  why does Dorsey such an inordinate amount of time and space on this scene?
  she is always in the weaker position in sex acts, we are finally allowed to see her on par with somebody
    don't know if the purpose is to explain this technology

Equivalencies
  a set of equivalencies is established in this story, which both echoes the other cyberpunk works, and establishes its own unique set of relations. here the equivalences break down in the following manner
  body = computer = commodity = objectification

  does thi apply to our current society? can you think of any examples?

"A naked woman sitting at a computer, which attracts you most?"
  what is important/interesting about this quote?
    sex because it can be replicated, become almost solely for reproduction
  how is the female body treated in this text compared to the other text in the class?
    treated as 'meat'.
    naked woman is unaware of her body s a sexual object
    more as a function than a person
  
  Narrator establishes active relation to the reader (speaks directly to the reader). With this question, which attracts you most? the narrator implicates the reader as a desiring subject

  max is revelaed to be more attracted by the computer. in this sense, the computer diplaces the female body as the obj of desire, but at the same time by metonymic association the obj of desire is feminized.

  "I've got the option on your bioware"
    he's literally saying i have ownership over this body, human? def not mechanical. An interesting conflation b/w bio (body) and ware as in object

    "it's like i told you last night. From now on, if you want it, you pay. Just like everyone else."
      "unpacking the phrases". the word pay is heavily loaded, turning things into a commodity, just like everyone else. Implicates us as a reader, but again weeds out this sort of preferential treatment, est. angel as a capitalist. idea of micropolitics, use the system against itself.

    what are angel's structures of obsession?
      manipulation through sex, tired of being able to be manipulated and its power dynamics.

    how do these structures tie in her personal morals? do they at all?
      subtle sort of revenge at the start of the story, but gives them the option of escaping, some guilt of hers.

    she builds a machine to replace sexual intimacy between people. her alienated relation to sex leads her to view sex in an objectified manner, specifically, according to the language of technology; she views orgasms in terms of binary code, therefore programmable. so again we have language of technology to describe the biological

    she designs it, not for profit, but to ty to prove to herself that people would rather be intimate with one another

  What does Angel achieve at the end of the story? Revenge? Confirmation of her cynicism? Does she get what she wants?
    revenge and confirmation
      how?
	a personal attack on these two people.

  Is she guilty of anything at the end of the story?

@apr8

  The stated goal of Linden Lab is to create a world like the Metaverse described by Stephenson, a user defined world in which people can interact, play, do business, and otherwise communicate.
  while 2nd life is sometimes referred to as a game, this description does not fir the standard definition. it does not have points, scores, winners or losers, levels, an end strategy or most of the other characteristics.

Metaverse
  a fp inhabitation of virtual world where a person can be constantly connected 

Residents retain intellectual property rights in their digital creations, they can buy, sell and trade with other residents
second life has its own economy an currency referred to as Linden Dollars, current supports millions of US dollars. this commerce is handled in their own dollars.

fear of external influence

how does it compare?

bodily avatars in the metaverse
  no bodily needs
  exploration
  communication
  subcultures and events


Sex and avatars
  there are places to mingle with other residents, in hobby areas, dance clubs. 
  Buy a "naked" avatar

  how does it compare to 'machine sex'?
    in the story it's actually something you hook up to your biology

    def of cyborgs, natural progression of the body into alternate versions of intercourse

  "I believe that organic sex, body against body, skin against skin is becoming no longer possible. what we're getting is a whole new order of sexual fantasies, involving a different order of experiences like car crashes, like travelling in jet planes, the whole overly of new technologies, architecture, interior design, communications, transport, merchandizing, etc"

  Does 2nd life > real life?

  in learning about machine sex we see two of the chars become addicted to angel's program. is this addiciton similar to the addiction ppl experience to 2nd life or WoW?
  
    it's inherently pleasurable, thats why its addictive

  What do you think is the draw of these types of worlds?
  Do you see them expanding or decreasing in the future?
  what issues might arise as we get closer to a truer metaverse?

@apr13

hard sci fi - writers = scientists, versimilitude
speculative fiction - plausibility within scientific framework
pomo scifi - language of science without accuracy, fragmentation
extrapolation - class, economic, gender, tech and fears attached
defamiliarization
cog dissonance
thought experiment 
hypothetical conditions
fictional experiment
scientific romance
utopia & distopia

micro politics
look at themes of the course, know a number of them for the final exam


agency, are we defined by our function?

agency - motivation - structure of obsession
- intention 

short essay q

what is the nature of knowledge at the end of fahrenheit 451? what needs to happen in montag's world what events or changes to allow the books to be shared?

come up with a thesis
  do you have an argument?
    that engages the q
      in an original or thoughtful way
    is that arg supported with references to scenes
    how well does the arg engage the themes and the work as whole

use vocab of the course, engage with those terms

what is the nature of knowledge at the end of f451
  define your terms
    knowledge in the framework, etc etc

    traditionally knowledge is viewed as a static sort of entity, i.e. contained, here we have knowledge being changed from an object, knowledge is embodied and by doing this we can argue that knowledge becomes less stable, 

    is neuromancer a thought experiment
      is not because it is more concerned with the aesthetics of the world than the premise or extrapolation

      practice making the outline
